---
layout: post
title:  "The Sign test for Medians"
date:   2020-01-12 22:02:38 +0530
categories: jekyll update
---

## Sign test for comparing 2 medians

### Objective:

The Sign test is used to compare whether median of two samples significantly different from zero.

### When to use the test

This test is used when each subject in a study is measured twice, before and after a treatment. 
In matched sample pair experimental design , where samples compared in pairs(control vs Treatment) are separable based on the rationale of the experiment.

### NULL Hypothesis
There is no significant differences between two sample medians. Difference in two sample medians are closer to zero

### Alternate Hypothesis
There is significant difference between 2 sample median values. Difference in two sample medians are not equal to zero

### Assumptions of the test
- The Sign test is a non parametric test. 
- The sign test is an alternative to a one sample t test or a paired t test. It can also be used for ordered (ranked) categorical data. 

### Example implementation in R

#### Example 1: Medians closer to zero

In Example 1 consider 2 samples CONTROL and TREATED with median values closer to zero. Assumptions of Example 1 are provided below

- NULL Hypothesis : Difference in Median values between Control and Treated samples are closer to zero.
- Alternate Hypothesis :  Difference in Median values between Control and Treated samples not equal to zero.


```R
CONTROL <- c(1.83, 0.50, 1.62, 2.48, 1.68, 1.88, 1.55, 3.06, 1.30)
```


```R
TREATED <- c(0.878, 0.647, 0.598, 2.05, 1.06, 1.29, 1.06, 3.14, 1.29)
```


```R
library(BSDA)
SIGN.test(CONTROL,TREATED,alternative = 'two.sided')
median(CONTROL)
median(TREATED)
```


    
    	Dependent-samples Sign-Test
    
    data:  CONTROL and TREATED
    S = 7, p-value = 0.1797
    alternative hypothesis: true median difference is not equal to 0
    95 percent confidence interval:
     -0.0730000  0.9261778
    sample estimates:
    median of x-y 
             0.49 
    
    Achieved and Interpolated Confidence Intervals: 
    
                      Conf.Level L.E.pt U.E.pt
    Lower Achieved CI     0.8203  0.010 0.6200
    Interpolated CI       0.9500 -0.073 0.9262
    Upper Achieved CI     0.9609 -0.080 0.9520




1.68



1.06


The p-value 0.1797 is greater than 0.05 (5% significance level), do not reject Null Hypothesis. Median value of CONTROL is 1.68 and Median value of TREATED is 1.06. Difference between median value of CONTROL and TREATED is 0.49 as calculated by SIGN test. The 0.49 is closer to zero which satisfies null hypothesis.

#### Example 2 : Medians not equal to zero

In Example 2 consider 2 samples A and B with median values not equal to zero. Assumptions of Example 2 are provided below

- Null Hypothesis : Difference in Median values between A and B samples are close to zero.
- Alternate Hypothesis :  Difference in Median values between A and B samples not  equal to zero.

```R
A <- c(443,421,436,376,458,408,422,431,459,369,360,431,403,436,376,370,443)
```


```R
B <- c(457,352,587,415,458,424,463,583,432,379,370,584,422,587,415,419,57)
```


```R
library(BSDA)
SIGN.test(A,B,alternative = 'two.sided')
median(A)
median(B)
```


    
    	Dependent-samples Sign-Test
    
    data:  A and B
    S = 3, p-value = 0.02127
    alternative hypothesis: true median difference is not equal to 0
    95 percent confidence interval:
     -48.91881 -10.00000
    sample estimates:
    median of x-y 
              -19 
    
    Achieved and Interpolated Confidence Intervals: 
    
                      Conf.Level   L.E.pt U.E.pt
    Lower Achieved CI     0.8565 -41.0000    -10
    Interpolated CI       0.9500 -48.9188    -10
    Upper Achieved CI     0.9510 -49.0000    -10




422



424


Median value of A is 422 and median value of B is 424. Median difference is -19  as calculated by SIGN test is less than zero, which satisfies the alternate hypothesis.  The p-value is 0.021, which is smaller than the alpha level of 0.05. We can reject the null hypothesis and say there is a significant difference.

### Example 3 : one sample signed rank test 

One sample signed rank test with hypothesized median 3 instead of zero.

- Null Hypothesis : Difference in Median values between Likert sample is closer to hypothesized median 3.
- Alternate Hypothesis : Difference in Median values between Likert sample not equal to hypothesized median 3

```R

DaInput =("
  Speaker           Rater     Likert
 'Maggie Simpson'   1         3
 'Maggie Simpson'   2         4
 'Maggie Simpson'   3         5
 'Maggie Simpson'   4         4
 'Maggie Simpson'   5         4
 'Maggie Simpson'   6         4
 'Maggie Simpson'   7         4
 'Maggie Simpson'   8         3
 'Maggie Simpson'   9         2
 'Maggie Simpson'  10         5
")

Data = read.table(textConnection(Input),header=TRUE)

library(BSDA)

SIGN.test(Data$Likert,
          md = 3)


One-sample Sign-Test

s = 7, p-value = 0.07031

alternative hypothesis: true median is not equal to 3



   ### Note the p-value in the output above

95 percent confidence interval:
 3.000000 4.675556

sample estimates:
median of x 
4
```
The pvalue 0.07 greater than 0.05 , do not reject null hypothesis. 

### Disadvantages

- Test can only identify the differences where difference between median values are close to zero.
- Tests like wilcoxon signed Rank test has much greater power in identifying the differences between median values in 2 samples.

### References
- https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Sign_test
- https://www.rdocumentation.org/packages/BSDA/versions/1.2.0/topics/SIGN.test

